Create new Construct TraceQL query doc; update links (#5275)
grafana/tempo: docs/sources/tempo/traceql/construct-traceql-queries.md

```
{ span.http.status_code >= 200 && span.http.status_code < 300 }
```

Find traces where a `DELETE` HTTP method was used and the intrinsic span status wasn't OK:

```
{ span.http.method = "DELETE" && status != ok }
```

Both expressions require all conditions to be true on the same span.
The entire expression inside of a pair of `{}` must be evaluated as true on a single span for it to be included in the result set.

In the above example, if a span includes an `.http.method` attribute set to `DELETE` where the span also includes a `status` attribute set to `ok`, the trace would not be included in the returned results.

## Combine spansets using operators

Spanset operators let you select different sets of spans from a trace and then make a determination between them.

### Logical

These spanset operators perform logical checks between the sets of spans.

- `{condA} && {condB}` - The and operator (`&&`) checks that both conditions found matches.
- `{condA} || {condB}` - The union operator (`||`) checks that either condition found matches. This functions as an "OR" statement.

{{< admonition type="note" >}}
A double pipe (`||`) is a union operator.

> A single pipe (`|`) lets you chain additional aggregators or conditions.

Author: ```suggestion
A single pipe (`|`) pipes matched spans into another TraceQL selector, aggregate, or other function.
```

Reviewer: I don't like adding `|` into this section b/c it's not a spanset operator.

Author: Okay. I'll remove this note.

Author: Done.

> {{< admonition type="note" >}}
> A double pipe (`||`) is a union operator.
> A single pipe (`|`) lets you chain additional aggregators or conditions.

Author: ```suggestion
```

{{< /admonition >}}

For example, to find a trace that went through two specific `cloud.region`:

```
{ resource.cloud.region = "us-east-1" } && { resource.cloud.region = "us-west-1" }
```

Note the difference between the previous example and this one:

```
{ resource.cloud.region = "us-east-1" && resource.cloud.region = "us-west-1" }
```

The second expression returns no traces because it's impossible for a single span to have a `resource.cloud.region` attribute that's set to both region values at the same time.

You can use a similar query to find a trace that passed through either `us-east-1` or `us-west-1` cloud regions:

```
{ resource.cloud.region = "us-east-1" } || { resource.cloud.region = "us-west-1" }
```

TraceQL provides multiple ways to perform similar queries.
For example, this query achieves the same result as the previous one.

> This query uses a pipe to indicate that either the first result or the second condition can be used (effectively chaining the options) instead of requiring a matching condition for either one or the other cloud region.

Author: @joe-elliott  New - adds your example and an explanation.

Reviewer: i'm good on this. i'm also good on simply removing the example above in favor of the more performant one :)

```

When using the same Grafana stack for multiple environments (for example, `production` and `staging`) or having services that share the same name but are differentiated though their namespace, the query looks like:

```
{
  resource.service.namespace = "ecommerce" &&
  resource.service.name = "frontend" &&
  resource.deployment.environment = "production" &&
  name = "POST /api/orders"
}
```

### Find traces having a particular outcome

This example finds all traces on the operation `POST /api/orders` that have a span that has errored:

```
{
  resource.service.name="frontend" &&
  name = "POST /api/orders" &&
  status = error
}
```

This example finds all traces on the operation `POST /api/orders` that return with an HTTP 5xx error:

```
{
  resource.service.name="frontend" &&
  name = "POST /api/orders" &&
  span.http.status_code >= 500
}
```

### Find traces that have a particular behavior

You can use query filtering on multiple spans of the traces.
This example locates all the traces of the `GET /api/products/{id}` operation that access a database. It's a convenient request to identify abnormal access ratios to the database caused by caching problems.

```

> {span.service.name="frontend" && name = "GET /api/products/{id}"} && {.db.system="postgresql"}

Author: would you like a second example with your new line?

> {span.service.name="frontend" && name = "GET /api/products/{id}"} && {.db.system="postgresql"}

Author: > also would this be improved with:
> 
> ```
> {span.service.name="frontend" && name = "GET /api/products/{id}"} >> {span.db.system="postgresql"}
> ```
> 
> to find database calls explicitly below the endpoint?

Is this suggested line change the same as the previous suggestion?

```
{ span.foo = "bar" }
```

You can use regular expressions to match multiple values of array `{span.http.request.header.Accept=~"application.*"}` and get all values of the array with `.*` regular expression.

```
{span.http.request.header.Accept=~".*"}
```

### Use structural operators

Find traces that include the `frontend` service, where either that service or a downstream service includes a span where an error is set.

```
{ resource.service.name="frontend" } >> { status = error }
```

Find all leaf spans that end in the `productcatalogservice`.

```
{ } !< { resource.service.name = "productcatalogservice" }
```

Find if `productcatalogservice` and `frontend` are siblings.

```
{ resource.service.name = "productcatalogservice" } ~ { resource.service.name="frontend" }
```

### Other examples

Find the services where the http status is 200, and list the service name the span belongs to along with returned traces.

```
{ span.http.status_code = 200 } | select(resource.service.name)
```

Find any trace with an unscoped `deployment.environment` attribute set to `production` and `http.status_code` attribute set to `200`:

> 

Author: Will do!

In the above example, if a span includes an `.http.method` attribute set to `DELETE` where the span also includes a `status` attribute set to `ok`, the trace would not be included in the returned results.

## Combine spansets using operators

Spanset operators let you select different sets of spans from a trace and then make a determination between them.

### Logical

These spanset operators perform logical checks between the sets of spans.

- `{condA} && {condB}` - The and operator (`&&`) checks that both conditions found matches.
- `{condA} || {condB}` - The union operator (`||`) checks that either condition found matches. This functions as an "OR" statement.

For example, to find a trace that went through two specific `cloud.region`:

```
{ resource.cloud.region = "us-east-1" } && { resource.cloud.region = "us-west-1" }
```

Note the difference between the previous example and this one:

```
{ resource.cloud.region = "us-east-1" && resource.cloud.region = "us-west-1" }
```

The second expression returns no traces because it's impossible for a single span to have a `resource.cloud.region` attribute that's set to both region values at the same time.

> You can use a similar query to find a trace that passed through either `us-east-1` or `us-west-1` cloud regions:

Author: OR example, per request in https://github.com/grafana/tempo/issues/4138#issuecomment-2905410873

Author: I've. added a clarification.
